Add 3.4.1 Stable variables (#31)
Web3NL/motoko-book: src/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/stable-variables.md

# Stable Variables
To persist the state of an actor when [upgrading](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/upgrades.html), we can declare [immutable](/common-programming-concepts/variables.html) and [mutable](/common-programming-concepts/mutability.html) variables to be `stable`. Stable variables must be of [*stable type*](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/stable-variables.html#stable-types).

> ## Mutating and Upgrading Stable Mutable Variables
> The [*mutable state of an actor*](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#a-simple-actor) is stored in the form of mutable variables that are declared with the `var` keyword. Mutable variables in actors always have `private` *visibility*. (although the `private` keyword is not necessary and is assumed by default).
> 
> If we want to persist the state of our actor when [upgrading](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/upgrades.html), we could declare our mutable variables `stable`, if it is of [stable type](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/stable-variables.html#stable-types). A stable variable looks like this:
> ```motoko
> {{#include _mo/stable-variables.mo:a}}
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Modifying and Upgrading Stable Variables
The [*state of an actor*](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#a-simple-actor) is stored in the form of variables that are declared with the `var` keyword or `let` keywords. Variable declarations in actors always have `private` *visibility*. (although the `private` keyword is not necessary and is assumed by default). In an actor, only `shared` functions can be declared `public`.  This means that a client of an actor can only communicate with the actor by calling its public functions, and never by directly modifying its private state variables, isolating actors from each other.

If we want to retain the state of our actor when [upgrading](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/upgrades.html), we need to declare all its state variables as `stable`. A variable can only be declared stable if  if it is of [stable type](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/stable-variables.html#stable-types). Many, but not all types, are stable. A stable variable declaration looks like this:
```motoko
{{#include _mo/stable-variables.mo:a}}
```
```

Stable variables can be both immutable and mutable, so I'd stress mutability less. An immutable stable variable might seem useless, but it may actually contain a reference to data that is itself mutable inside,
eg

```
actor counter{
   stable let counter = { var value = 1 };
   public shared func inc() : async () { counter.value := 1 };
}
```
here counter is let bound, so hard on the outside, yet chewy (mutable) on the inside. If you see what I mean.

Author: Got it!

Stable variables can only be declared inside [actors](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html). Stable variables always have `private` *visibility*. 

The following *types* for *[immutable](common-programming-concepts/variables.html) or [mutable](/common-programming-concepts/mutability.html)* variables in actors (in addition to all [shared types](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/async-data/shared-types.html)) could be declared stable.

### Stable Mutable Array
Immutable or mutable variables of [*mutable array type*](/common-programming-concepts/types/mutable-arrays.html) could be declared stable:
```motoko
{{#include _mo/stable-var1.mo:a}}
```

*Immutable variable* `a1` can be stable because `[var Nat]` is a mutable array type. *Mutable variable* `a2` can be stable because `[var Text]` is of mutable array type.   

### Stable Records with Mutable Fields
Immutable or mutable variables of [*records with mutable fields*](/common-programming-concepts/types/records.html) could be declared stable:
```motoko
{{#include _mo/stable-var1.mo:b}}
```

> *Immutable variable* `r1` and *mutable variable* `r2` can be stable because they have a value of a *record with a mutable field*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Immutable variable* `r1` and *mutable variable* `r2` can both be declared stable because they both contain  a *record with a mutable field* and the inferred types of those records are stable types.
```

### Stable Objects with Mutable Variables
Immutable or mutable variables of [*objects with (private or public) mutable variables*](/common-programming-concepts/objects-and-classes/objects.html) could be declared stable:
```motoko
{{#include _mo/stable-var1.mo:c}}
```

*Immutable variable* `o1` and *mutable variable* `o2` can be stable because they have a value of an *object with private and public mutable variables*. 

### Stable Objects with Private Functions
Immutable or mutable variables of [*objects with private functions*](/common-programming-concepts/objects-and-classes/objects.html) could be declared stable:
```motoko
{{#include _mo/stable-var1.mo:d}}

> ```

Reviewer: Objects with only private functions aren't really objects. Maybe turn this into a negative example instead by making the functions public, in which case the declaration will be rejected because it can't be stable.

*Immutable variable* `p1` and *mutable variable* `p2` can be stable because they have a value of an *object with a private function*. 

### Other stable types
On top all [shared types](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/async-data/shared-types.html) and the types mentioned above, the following types could also be stable:  
- [Tuples](/common-programming-concepts/types/tuples.html) of stable types 
- [Option](/common-programming-concepts/options-and-results.html) types of any stable types
- [Variant](/common-programming-concepts/types/variants.html) types with associated types that are stable

## How it works
Declaring variable(s) `stable` causes the following to happen *automatically* when [upgrading](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence/upgrades.html) our canister with new actor code:

> - The value of the variable(s) is *serialized* into [Candid format](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/async-data/candid.html#candid-serialization).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The value of the variable(s) is *serialized* into [Candid format](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/async-data/candid.html#candid-serialization).
```
It's actually not Candid but an extension of Candid to support mutable data. I would just say serialized into an internal format, because we eventually plan to move away from this abuse of Candid. It's a long story...

- The serialized Candid format is copied to [stable memory](/advanced-concepts/scalability/stable-storage.html).  
- The upgraded actor code (in the form of a [Wasm module](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors/actor-to-canister.html#code-compiling-and-wasm-modules)) is installed in the [canister](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors/actor-to-canister.html) and the state of the variables is lost.
- The values in Candid format inside stable memory are retrieved and [*deserialized*](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/async-data/candid.html#candid-serialization).

> - The variables of the new actor code are assigned the original deserialized values.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Any stable variable of the new actor code, present in both the old and the new actor, is assigned its previous value, by deserializing this value from stable memory.
- Any stable variable, present in the new actor, but absent in the old, is initialized by evaluating its declaration.
```
